=====================
Adding new potentials
=====================

New LAMMPS-compatible potentials can easily be integrated into the framework.
The iprPy framework makes a distinction between a potential and a potential
implementation.  

- The “potential” is the code-independent mathematical interaction model. It
  is the idea of the interaction and typically associated with a publication.

- The “implementation” is any version of the potential designed to work with
  specific atomistic code(s). It is the actual parameters, extrapolation and
  files that are used to calculate the interaction.

Ideally, any implementation should exactly reproduce the underlying potential
model. However, this often does not occur as implementations use numerical
approximations that are easier/faster to solve. Different atomistic codes use
different interpolations, there can be variations in the included data points,
and numerical precision of the parameters is not perfect and can vary between
implementations. 

Uniquely identifying each potential and implementation is important for
characterizing and understanding the predictions provided by the interaction
models. A potential can be thought of as defining one or more virtual
elements.  These virtual elements typically feature properties and behaviors
associated with real elements, but not always.  Although multiple potentials
can be associated with the same real element(s), it is important to keep in
mind that the virtual element(s) for each potential is/are different and
unique.

As for thinking about implementations, a simple analogy with experimental
chemistry is that an implementation is to a virtual element what a sample is
to a pure real element.  Every implementation provides a representation of a
virtual element, but is imperfect due to numerical limitations. Every sample
provides a representation of a pure real element, but is imperfect due to
impurities.  A high-quality implementation/sample is one in which the
imperfections are small enough that they have a negligible effect on measured
properties.

Assign Potential and Implementation keys and id’s
-------------------------------------------------

Potential keys and id’s
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each potential is uniquely identified with both a machine-readable hash key
and a human-readable id.  The machine-readable key is a randomly generated
UUID4 key. The human-readable id is a string generated based on the
publication information associated with the potential.
  
The format used a potential’s id is::
    
    YEAR--Lastname-F-M--model

where “YEAR” is the publication year, the last name and initials correspond to
the publication’s primary author, and “model” uniquely identifies the
interaction model. Typically, “model” can simply be a list of the elemental
symbols defined by the potential. For cases where this is not enough (multiple
potentials for the same element given in the same paper or published in the
same year) then the symbols can be followed by a number or an alternate
identifier used by the authors themselves for differentiating the models. 

For potentials that do not have a publication associated with them (either
unpublished or yet-to-be published), the year and name fields can be based on
the creation year and the primary creator’s name. If an associated publication
comes out later, then the potential’s id is updated but the potential’s key is
left unchanged. Keeping the key the same allows for results to be properly
tracked and catalogued. 

Implementation keys and id’s
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Each implementation of a potential is also assigned a unique key and id.  The
implementation’s key is a random UUID4, and the implementation’s id has the
format::

    PotentialID--Code--Version.

Here, “PotentialID” is the id for the associated potential, “Code” indicates
which atomistic code it is designed for, and “Version” provides additional
information to uniquely identify the implementation.  

Since the current iprPy only supports potential_LAMMPS implementations, “Code”
should have one of two values:

- “LAMMPS” for potentials that are natively interpreted by the LAMMPS
  software, and
- “openKIM” for potentials that are part of the openKIM framework.

As for “Version”, this is left to the discretion of users, but should remain
consistent for a given project. For instance, LAMMPS potential implementations
hosted on the Interatomic Potential Repository are given “Version” information
consisting of IPR-#, where # is a hosted version # starting with 1 and
increasing any time updates/replacement files are provided that alter the
numbers or parameters associated with the potential. 

Example id’s
~~~~~~~~~~~~

For an example, let’s say Bon Scott published a potential for actinium,
dysprosium and carbon in 1979. The potential’s id would be::

    1979--Scott-B--Ac-Dy-C

Now, there can be multiple implementations of this potential:

- An implementation created personally by Brian Johnson and not hosted
  elsewhere::
        
        1979--Scott-B--Ac-Dy-C--LAMMPS--Johnson-1
        
- An implementation hosted on the Interatomic Potential Repository::
        
        1979--Scott-B--Ac-Dy-C--LAMMPS--IPR-1
    
- An implementation in the openKIM framework, which has a short KIM ID of
  MO_123456789012_001:
        
        1979--Scott-B--Ac-Dy-C--openKIM--MO_123456789012_001

New Potential vs. New Implementation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It can occasionally be ambiguous to determine if an update to a potential
results in a new potential or a new implementation. These following guidelines
can be used to help differentiate between the two

#. Altering or refitting empirical parameters to improve predictions
   constitutes a new potential model.

#. Published parameter corrections due to typos in the original work create a
   new implementation as the corrections reflect the authors original intent.
   
#. Changes in interpretations of a model typically coincide with a new
   implementation as they don't alter the underlying model.
   
#. Classifying simple modifications, such as cutoff functions and rounding at
   extremely close interatomic distances, can be subjective.  In these cases
   it comes down to determining if the model is still fundamentally the same
   for important use cases, or if it results in a substantial, meaningful
   improvement.
   
Creating a potential_LAMMPS record
----------------------------------

A LAMMPS implementation of a potential can be added to the iprPy by creating a
potential_LAMMPS record for it and saving it as a JSON file in the
library/potential_LAMMPS directory.  The structure of the record is fairly
straight forward and is consistent with a common json/xml structure.

"potential-LAMMPS"
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The data model for the record has a single root element called
"potential-LAMMPS".  All other elements are subelements of this root.

"key"
~~~~~

The first subelement of "potential-LAMMPS".  This is a UUID4 hash-key that
uniquely identifies the implementation.

"id"
~~~~

The second subelement of "potential-LAMMPS".  This is a human-readable id that
uniquely identifies the implementation.

"potential"
~~~~~~~~~~~

The third subelement of "potential-LAMMPS".  This element identifies the
potential model that the implementation represents with the following
subelements:

- "key" is the UUID4 that uniquely identifies the potential model.

- "id" is the human-readable id that uniquely identifies the potential model.

"units"
~~~~~~~

The fourth subelement of "potential-LAMMPS".  This specifies the LAMMPS units
option to use with the potential.

"atom_style"
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The fifth subelement of "potential-LAMMPS".  This specifies the LAMMPS
atom_style option to use with the potential.

"atom"
~~~~~~

The sixth subelement of "potential-LAMMPS". This provides information relating
to the atomic interaction models defined by the potential.  For each atomic
interaction model, the following can be defined:

- "element" is the chemical element tag associated with the atomic model.

- "symbol" is the unique symbol used by the potential to identify the atomic
  model.

- "mass": the atomic mass to use with all atoms of the given atomic model.

For most potentials, "element" and "symbol" are equivalent.  As such, if only
one of the two is given, the other is automatically assigned the same value.
Similarly, if mass is not given, then it will be assigned the standard
reference value associated with "element".  While the mass value is not
required, it is recommended that it be included for consistency, and should
match what the developers used if known.

"pair_style"
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The seventh subelement of "potential-LAMMPS".  This classifies the terms that
appear in the LAMMPS pair_style command associated with the potential.  It
uses the following subelements:

- "type" defines the LAMMPS pair_style option used by the implementation.

- "term" lists any extra terms that appear in the pair_style line.  (See below
  for more information on the "term" subelement.)


"pair_coeff"
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The eighth subelement of "potential-LAMMPS".  This lists and classifies the
terms that appear in any LAMMPS pair_coeff commands required by the potential.
Each pair_coeff line is defined with the following subelements:

- "interaction" specifies the atoms associated with the pair_coeff interaction
  definition.  It contains a single subelement "symbol", which lists all 
  atomic model symbols associated with the interaction.  "interaction" is
  optional if all atomic interactions are defined with the same pair_coeff
  line.

- "term" lists any terms that appear in the pair_coeff line.  (See below
  for more information on the "term" subelement.)

"command"
~~~~~~~~~

The final (optional) subelement of "potential-LAMMPS". This classifies the
terms that appear in any other LAMMPS commands required by the implementation.
It has a single subelement:

- "term" lists all terms that appear in a LAMMPS command line.  (See below for
  more information on the "term" subelement.)
  
"term"
~~~~~~

The "term" element is used by the "pair_style", "pair_coeff", and "command"
elements.  It provides a list that characterizes the options and parameters
contained within a LAMMPS input command line.  Each word of the command line
is listed in order and characterized as one of the following:

- "option" is a string option choice or value.

- "parameter" is a numerical parameter value.

- "file" is the path to a potential's parameter file.

- "symbols" is a Boolean indicating to show a list of the atomic symbols that
  are to be associated with the integer atom types of the atomic
  configuration.

- "symbolsList" is a Boolean indicating to show a list of all unique atomic
  symbols to associate with a particular interaction model. DEPRECIATED as its
  usage is incorrect.

Examples
--------

The potential_LAMMPS data model was created to allow similar treatment across
the wide range of potential formats (i.e. pair_styles) supported by LAMMPS.
This is important as the format of the pair_style and pair_coeff lines vary
between different pair_styles.  Currently, five distinct formats have been
recognized, and examples are given here for how to represent each using a
potential_LAMMPS record.

#. Simple pair styles, e.g. lj, morse, born.

#. Original EAM style.

#. Many-body potentials, e.g. eam/alloy, tersoff, sw.

#. Many-body potentials with library files, e.g. meam.

#. hybrid and hybrid-overlay styles.

**NOTE!** The examples are not for real potentials! They are only meant to
provide a demonstration for different potential styles.

Simple pair styles
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The main thing to note with the simple pair styles is that each
"pair_coeff"-"interaction" specifies exactly two "symbol" values::

    {
        "potential-LAMMPS": {
            "key": "7102f7ec-3612-4665-ad7e-60de508b5f37",
            "id": "lj_cut-demo--He-Ar--LAMMPS--v1",
            "potential": {
                "key": "ebf17ffa-a5e7-41c5-8e6d-8e00eb7f5068",
                "id": "lj_cut-demo--He-Ar"
            },
            "units": "lj",
            "atom_style": "atomic",
            "atom": [
                {
                    "element": "He"
                },
                {
                    "element": "Ar"
                }
            ],
            "pair_style": {
                "type": "lj/cut",
                "term": {
                    "parameter": 10.0
                }
            },
            "pair_coeff": [
                {
                    "interaction": {
                        "symbol": [
                            "He",
                            "He"
                        ]
                    },
                    "term": [
                        {
                            "parameter": 1.0
                        },
                        {
                            "parameter": 1.0
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "interaction": {
                        "symbol": [
                            "Ar",
                            "Ar"
                        ]
                    },
                    "term": [
                        {
                            "parameter": 2.0
                        },
                        {
                            "parameter": 2.0
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "interaction": {
                        "symbol": [
                            "He",
                            "Ar"
                        ]
                    },
                    "term": [
                        {
                            "parameter": 1.0
                        },
                        {
                            "parameter": 2.0
                        }
                    ]
                }
            ]
        }
    }

Original EAM style
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The original EAM style can be thought of as a variation of the simple pair
styles.  The difference here is that cross-element interactions are defined
automatically by the potential and are not specified by the pair_coeff lines::

    {
        "potential-LAMMPS": {
            "key": "d78cad46-a61e-439a-9676-38219e78ef1b", 
            "id": "eam-demo--Ni-Cu--LAMMPS--ipr1", 
            "potential": {
                "key": "776db45c-7f1d-42f8-8b85-5c8dfd2d240c", 
                "id": "eam-demo--Ni-Cu"
            }, 
            "units": "metal", 
            "atom_style": "atomic", 
            "atom": [
                {
                    "element": "Cu", 
                    "mass": 63.55
                }, 
                {
                    "element": "Ni", 
                    "mass": 58.71
                }
            ], 
            "pair_style": {
                "type": "eam"
            }, 
            "pair_coeff": [
                {
                    "interaction": {
                        "symbol": [
                            "Cu", 
                            "Cu"
                        ]
                    }, 
                    "term": {
                        "file": "Cu.eam"
                    }
                }, 
                {
                    "interaction": {
                        "symbol": [
                            "Ni", 
                            "Ni"
                        ]
                    }, 
                    "term": {
                        "file": "Ni.eam"
                    }
                }
            ]
        }
    }

Many-body potentials
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

With the many-body potentials, all interactions are defined in the same
potential parameter file, which is called by a single pair_coeff LAMMPS input
command.  Because of this, the "pair_coeff"-"interaction" is optional, but if
it is given, it should list all included "symbol" atomic models::

    {
        "potential-LAMMPS": {
            "key": "a45a7731-d115-4079-b6f5-aa700c5b5c56",
            "id": "EAM-alloy-demo--Ni-Al-Co--LAMMPS--v1",
            "potential": {
                "key": "820738a9-f556-468b-9041-9d98351ff751",
                "id": "EAM-alloy-demo--Ni-Al-Co"
            },
            "units": "metal",
            "atom_style": "atomic",
            "atom": [
                {
                    "element": "Ni",
                    "mass": 58.6934
                },
                {
                    "element": "Al",
                    "mass": 26.981539
                },
                {
                    "element": "Co",
                    "mass": 58.9332
                }
            ],
            "pair_style": {
                "type": "eam/alloy"
            },
            "pair_coeff": {
                "term": [
                    {
                        "file": "file.eam.alloy"
                    },
                    {
                        "symbols": "True"
                    }
                ]
            }
        }
    }

Many-body potentials with library files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Potential styles, such as MEAM, require both a library file and a potential
file.  Between the two files in the pair_coeff line is a list of all symbols
for the potential.  This first list of symbols is constant and its order is
dependent on how interactions are defined in the potential file::

    {
        "potential-LAMMPS": {
            "key": "ac63aa71-808c-47e7-b80b-991a50870f35",
            "id": "MEAM-demo--Cu-Al-Fe--LAMMPS--v1",
            "potential": {
                "key": "9546264a-06b8-451a-9920-f8a17cc6917b",
                "id": "MEAM-demo--Cu-Al-Fe"
            },
            "units": "metal",
            "atom_style": "atom",
            "atom": [
                {
                    "element": "Cu",
                    "symbol": "CuX"
                },
                {
                    "element": "Al",
                    "symbol": "AlX"
                },
                {
                    "element": "Fe",
                    "symbol": "FeX"
                }
            ],
            "pair_style": {
                "type": "meam"
            },
            "pair_coeff": {
                "term": [
                    {
                        "file": "library.meam"
                    },
                    {
                        "option": "CuX AlX FeX"
                    },
                    {
                        "file": "potential.meam"
                    },
                    {
                        "symbols": true
                    }
                ]
            }
        }
    }
    
hybrid and hybrid/overlay styles
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The two hybrid styles then combine multiple other pair_styles.  Note that the
nature of the hybrid syles makes the order of the pair_coeff values important::

    {
        "potential-LAMMPS": {
            "key": "7687807f-6355-4bef-bdc3-dc0dc944e106",
            "id": "hybrid-demo--Cu-H--LAMMPS--v3",
            "potential": {
                "key": "14226c15-561c-44d4-96ad-ad51304a3606",
                "id": "hybrid-demo--Cu-H"
            },
            "units": "metal",
            "atom_style": "atom",
            "atom": [
                {
                    "element": "Cu"
                },
                {
                    "element": "H"
                }
            ],
            "pair_style": {
                "type": "hybrid",
                "term": [
                    {
                        "option": "eam/alloy"
                    },
                    {
                        "option": "lj/cut"
                    },
                    {
                        "parameter": 5.0
                    }
                ]
            },
            "pair_coeff": [
                {
                    "interaction": {
                        "symbol": [
                            "Cu"
                        ]
                    },
                    "term": [
                        {
                            "option": "eam/alloy"
                        },
                        {
                            "file": "cu.eam.alloy"
                        },
                        {
                            "symbols": true
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "interaction": {
                        "symbol": [
                            "Cu",
                            "H"
                        ]
                    },
                    "term": [
                        {
                            "option": "lj/cut"
                        },
                        {
                            "parameter": 3.5
                        },
                        {
                            "parameter": 3.0
                        }
                    ]
                },
                {
                    "interaction": {
                        "symbol": [
                            "H",
                            "H"
                        ]
                    },
                    "term": [
                        {
                            "option": "lj/cut"
                        },
                        {
                            "parameter": 1.2
                        },
                        {
                            "parameter": 2.4
                        }
                    ]
                }
            ]
        }
    }